---
title: "The Eternal Now by Paul Tillich"
date: 2022-09-21T01:07:40Z
---

What follows are some of my favorite excerpts from the Theologian Paul Tillich's book 'The Eternal Now'.    

*They withdraw into a self-chosen loneliness, taking revenge through bitterness
and hostility towards those they feel have rejected them, actually enjoying the
pain of their loneliness.*   
 
*One of these ways is the desire towards the silence of nature. We can speak
without voice to the trees and the clouds and the waves of the sea. Without
words they respond though the rustling of leaves and the moving of clouds and
the murmuring of the sea.*   
  
*There have been nations that were unable to throw anything of their heritage
into the past, and thus cut themselves off from new growth, until the weight of
their past crushed their present and brought them to extinction. And sometims
we might ask if the Christian Church, as well as foreign religions, has not
carried with it too much of its past, and left behind too little. Forgetting is
probably more difficult for a religious tradition than any other human
heritage. But God is not only the beginning from which we came; he is also the
end to which we go.*   
   

*But all this enthusiasm also cannot be used and increased. Most of the objects
of our early enthusiasm must be sacrificed for a few, and those few approached
soberly. No maturity is possible without this sacrifice. Yet often a deep
yearning for the lost possibilities and that enthusiasm takes hold of us.
Innocence and youthful enthusiasm: we had them, and we did not have them. Life
itself demanded that they be taken from us. But there are other things that we
had and that were taken from us because we were guilty of taking too much for
granted. Some of us were depply sensitive to the wonder of life as it is
revealed in nature. Slowly, under the pressure of work and social life and the
lure of cheaply pleasures, we lose the wonder of our earlier years --- the
intense joy and sense of the mystery of life in the freshness of the young day
or the glory of the dying afternoon, the splendour of the mountains the the
infinity of the sea, or in the perfection of the movements of a young animal or
of a flower breaking through the soil. We try perhaps to evoke such feelings
again, but we find ourselves empty and do not succeed. We had that sensitity
and we did not have it, and it was taken from us.*   
   
*How can we describe the life that the Spirit gives us? I could use many words,
well known to everbody, spoken by Paul himself, and after him by the great
preachers and teachers of the Church. I could say that the work of the Spirit,
liberating us from the law, is freedom. Or I could say that its work is faith,
or that its work is hope, and, above all, that the Spirit creates love, the
love in which all laws are confirmed and fulfilled and at that same time
overcome. But if I used such words, the shadow of the absent God would appear
and make you and me aware that we cannot speak like this today. If we did,
freedom would be distorted into wilfulness, faith into belief in the absurd,
hope into unreal expectations, and love --- the word I wold like most to use
for the creation of the Spirit --- into sentimental feeling. The Spirit must
give us new words, or revitalize old words to express true life. We must wait
for them; we must pray for them; we cannot force them. But we know, in some
moments of our lives, what life is. We know that that it is great and holy,
deep and abundant, ecstatic and sober, limited and distorted by time, fulfilled
by eternity. And if the right words fail us in the absence of God, we may look
without words at the image of him in whom the Spirit and the Life are manifest
without limits.*    
 
*But in our period of history, work has become the dominating destiny of all
men, if not in reality, at least by demand. It is everything --- discipline,
production, creation. The difference between labour and work is gone. The fact
that is stands under a curse in the biblical view is forgotten. It has become a
religion itself, the religion of modern industrial society. And it has all of
us in its grip. Even if we were able to escape the punishment of starvation for
not working, something within us would not permit an escape from the bondage to
work. For most of us it is both a necessity and a compulsion. And as such, it
has become the favoured way of the flight from God.* This coming from Tillich, a Protestant theologian, is revealing[Christopher Hill].   

*Or I could say that its work is faith, or that its work is hope, and, above
all, that the Spirit creates love, the love in which all laws are confirmed and
fulfilled and at the same time overcome. But if I used such words, the shadow
of the absent God would appear and make you and me aware that we cannot speak
like this today. If we did, freedom would be distorted into willfulness, faith
into belief in the absurd, hope into unreal expectations, and love --- the word
I would like most to use for the creation of the Spirit --- into sentimental
feeling. The Spirit must give us new words, or revitalize old worlds to express
true life. We must wait for them; we must pray for them; we canmnot force them.
But we know, in some moments of our lives, what life is. We know that it is
great and holy, deep and abundant, ecstatic and sober, limited and distorted by
time, fulfilled by eternity. And if the right words fail us in the absence of
God, we may look without words at the image of him in whom the Spirit and the
Life are manifest without limits.*    

> I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. 
	-- Rev. 21.6

*But we should not forget that we would not be able to live and to face the
future if there were not blessings that support us and which come from the same
source as the curses.*   

*Most people try to avoid the risk by being conformed to the state of things
into which they have been thrown by destiny. But those who have transformed our
world risk wrong decisions. And the great men they were, the most conscious
were they of the risk. They did not cease to doubt in spite of the depth and
the passion of their faith. For when they refused to be conformed to their
families and traditions, they were not instead conformed to themselves, but
were renewed in their own being and could thus renew other beings. And
precisely for this reason they never became self-assured --- they took upon
themselves the risk of not being conformed and the anxiety and doubt and glory
of this risk.*    

*We are familiar with strong personalities, perhaps in our families, among
friends, or in public life, whom we admire, but in whom we feel something is
wanting. This something is love. They may be friendly and be willing to help.
This they demand of themselves. But everything they demand of themselves they
also demand of others. They use the word 'be' without hesitation. They become
tyrants through personal strength. Without love he who is strong becomes a law
for the weak. And the law makes those who are weak even weaker. It drives them
into despair, or rebellion, or indifference. Strength without love destroys,
first others, then itself. For love is not something that may or may not be
added to strength in its fullest sense; it is an eleent of strength. One cannot
be strong without love. For love is not an irrelevant emotion; it is the blood
of life, the power of reunion of the separated. Strength without love leads to
separation, to judgement, to control of the weak. Love reunites what is
separated;  it acepts what is judged; it participates in what is weak, as God
participates in our weakness and gives uf strength by his participation.*      

*There are no limits to giving thanks in the whole of creation. But are there
not limits in our life? Can we honestly give thanks for the frustrations,
accidents, and diseases that strike us? We cannot in the moment when they take
hold of us. Here is one of the many situations where piety can degenerate into
dishonesty. For we rightly resist such evils. We want to remove them; we are
often angry against our destiny and its divine ground. And there are depths of
suffering, bodily and mental, in which even the question of thanking or not
thanking does not appear. Out of the depths the psalmist cries to God; he does
not thank him. This is honest, realistic --- a realism born out of the
awareness of the divine presence.*    

*We must therefore be grateful to those who express our present situation
honestly.*   


 





